# Question 1

**1. A new company has been established. It has bought some new premises which consist of a number of buildings on a single site. It has decided that all of the computer workstations in the different buildings need to be networked. They are considering ways in which the network might be set up.**

**a. One option they are considering is to use cabling for the network and to install it themselves.**

- **1. Identify the three types of cabling that they might consider. [2]**

  - Twisted Pair Cabling:

    - Cheap

    1.  STP (Shielded) - less prone to interference and crosstalk
    2.  UTP (Unshielded) - much more prone to interference and crosstalk

  - Fiber Optic Cabling:

    - Expensive, not subjected to interference
    - For communication between servers and networking devices like routers, switches

  - Coax Cabling:
    - Not used anymore in modern businesses.
    - Sometimes, it's used to connect to a satellite antenna to get internet in rural areas

- **2. Explain two factors, other than cost, that they need to consider when choosing suitable cabling [4]**

  - Bandwidth and system requirement should be determined when selecting the type of cable required. If a huge bandwidth is required, for example, a connection between a networking device and a server, (like a file server) that requires a large bandwidth as it will have to transfer large files to clients simultaneously (over protocols like samba or ftp). In this case, the higher bandwidth will help the server handle multiple clients without any throttling or any bottlenecks.

  - Distance between the devices should also be considered. If you require to transfer data over a distance of 80 meters or 100 meters, select fiber optic cabling as it would have no issue with such distances even though it's expensive.

  - Interference and Crosstalk should also be considered. Crosstalk is a form of interference in which signals in one cable induces electromagnetic interference in an adjacent cable. This will cause ethernet frames / ip packets to drop. UTP is subjected to cross talk. Fiber Optic and STP are not.

**b. Another option they are considering is to use wireless technology for at least part of the network.**

- **1. Explain one option that might be suitable for wireless networking. [2]**

  - Use Wireless-Fidelity Technology. Wifi uses radio waves to transmit data among devices in the network. The Wireless Access Point (WAP) is connected to a Wired Network (mostly using twisted pair cabling) which helps other devices to connect to that wired network wirelessly. As WiFi uses Radio waves to transmit data, the Wifi signal can penetrate through walls easily giving a higher coverage to the devices around the Access Point. ( Wireless Routers also exist ).

- **2. Identify one advantage, other than cost, of using wireless rather than cable networking. [1]**

  - Mobility, Portability, Scalability, Subject to Interference.

- **3. Identify one disadvantage (other than cost) of using wireless rather than cable networking. [1]**

  - Signal interference leading to signal degradation, packet loss, and slower data transfer rates

**c. The final option they are considering is to use the services of a PSTN.**

- **1. Define what a PSTN is or does**

  - Public Switched Telephone Network (also called Plain Old Telephone Service (POTS)) is the global system of interconnected telephone networks that use circuit-switched technology for voice communication

- **2. Explain how a PSTN could provide a network for the company. [3]**

  - In the old times, PSTN was originally made for voice transmission (as the name suggests), it has now been adapted to transfer digital data as well.

  - As the name suggests, PSTN uses Circuit Switching. It is a technique where a dedicated physical circuit is established between two devices for the entire duration of the communication. This is different from modern Packet Switching technique where the data is broken down into smaller parts called packets that are sent over the network independently after being encapsulated into an ethernet header. Due to this, Circuit Switching is able to provide a much lower latency and less jitter (differences in times taken to receive the sent data)


# Question 2

**a. The Domain Name System is vitally important for Internet users.**

- **1. Identify the type of software used by the system and the type of hardware on which the software is installed.  [2]**

	- Domain Name System is a hierarchical and distributed naming system that maps an alphanumeric address to an IP 
	- Address - for easy access. Domain Name Server Softwares and DNS servers of ISP or DNS Hosting Providers are used.

- **2. Identify two types of application that use the Domain Name System and for each give a brief description of how it is used [4]**

	- A web browser: when a user wants to visit google.com, the IP for the google.com should be resolved (the DNS query for google.com is resolved by the DNS Resolver)
	- Emails: when a user sends an email, the IP of the email server should be resolved

- **b. In the classful IPv4 addressing scheme, the 32-bit binary code for the address has the
top (most significant) bit set to 0 if it is of class A, the top two bits set to 10 if class B or
the top three bits set to 110 if class C. In a document an IPv4 address has been written
as 205.124.16.152.**

- **1. Give the name for this notation for an IP address and explain how it relates to the 32-bit binary code**

	- This IP: 205.124.16.152 is represented in dotted decimal notation
	- The IPv4 address is broken down into four sets of octets separated by dots (.)
	- Each octet can store a maximum value of 255 dernary

		```
		Break it as
			205		124		16		152
			11001101	01111100	00010000	10011000
		```


- **2. Identify the class of the address and explain your reason. [2]**

	- The binary code starts with 110 in first three bits, so, this is a Class C address

- **3. Explain why an IPv4 address defines a netID and a hostID. [3]**

	- Both the net id and the host id together created the full ip address. The net id represents the network which the device belongs to. In classful ipv4 addressing, the net id is defined by the first set of bits in the ip address, which determines the class of the address and the default network mask. Host id is what identifies the devices within the specific network. The number of bits used to store the host id varies with the number of bits used to store the net id. This is done for easier routing of data among the network. To summarize, the net id tells the router which network to send the packet to and the host id part of the ip address tells which device to send the packet to within that network. 

	- For example, consider this IPv4 address and subnet mask:
		- IPv4 address: 192.168.1.100
		- Subnet mask: 255.255.255.0 			(this is represented by /24 suffix)

	- By performing a bitwise AND operation between these two values, the network ID is obtained:
		- 192.168.1.100 (IPv4 address)
		- AND
		- 255.255.255.0 (Subnet mask)
		- 192.168.1.0 (Network ID)

	- In this example, the network ID is 192.168.1.0, and the host ID is 100.


**c. If the CIDR scheme for an IPv4 address is used the IP address 205.124.16.152 would be written as: 205.124.16.152/24, State the binary code for the hostID in this address, with a reason [2]**

- The /24 indicates that the first 24 bits of the 32 bits ipv4 address are being used to represent the net id, leaving only 8 bits for the host id according to the CIDR scheme. 

- To find the host id, convert the last octet (152) to binary: 10011000

- The /24 here tells that the subnet mask is 255.255.255.0, now, we should bitwise AND them together.

	```
	205.124.16.152
	255.255.255.0
	———————
	205.124.16.0		<- network ID
	```

- Therefore, only the last octet is left as host ID: 152 in binary is 10011000

# Question 3

**3. A user watches a video provided by a website that uses on-demand bit streaming. Describe the measures needed to ensure that the video does not periodically pause when it is being watched. [6]**

- The user should have sufficient bandwidth to support the streaming of the video stream without any interruptions. When the user has a high bandwidth network connection, higher quality video of like 2.5Mbps could be streamed without buffering.

- The video player should have a large enough buffer to buffer enough data to prevent pauses during playback. The buffer size should be dynamically adjusted according to the users network connection and video decoding capabilities to suit the needs perfectly

- A Content delivery network (CDN) can be used to distribute the video to different servers which are closer to the end user, reducing streaming latency and improving the streaming experience. 

- QoS (Quality of Service) can be used in routers to set up packet priorities. Setting this up for video streams will avoid the change of playback interruptions that could occur due to congestion in the local area network

- A proper video encoding format should be selected according to the needs. Video encoding can be defined as compressing the video file into a format that can be easily streamed over the internet. When encoding a video, these values should be set according to the needs

	- Bitrate: amount of data transmitted per second
	- Resolution: amount of pixels in the video frame (usually taken as width*height)
	- Frame Rate: no. of frames played per second. In movies, this is usually 24 fps (frames per second). A much smoother video experience can be gained by streaming 60fps content

- These are some main facts to consider when encoding a video file. The end device that streams this data should support decoding this encoded video stream without any issues. Sometimes, due to CPU or GPU bottlenecks, higher quality content might cause trouble as they have to be decoded in real time (this happens a lot in old hardware. For example: you can’t smoothly play a 4k youtube video on a pentium 4 cpu)

# Question 4

**a. Describe where private IP addresses can be used. [2]**

- Private IP addresses are used within a private network, such as in a SOHO (Small Office / Home Office), or almost for each and every local device connected to the network. These are not directly routable to the internet and require a NAT (Network Address Translation) to do so. The IETF has defined the local IPs to be within these ranges:

- We can also see Private IPs being used within Virtual Private Networks. 

**b. Explain how it can be ensured that private and public IP addresses are not used in the wrong context.  [4]**

- Network segmentation can be done. This helps to isolate private and public networks and prevent devices from using the wrong Ip address ranges. For example: this can make sure that public ip should be used only for devices that need to be publicly accessible over the internet. 

- Make sure that the devices in the private network should use correct IP address ranges

# Question 5

**a. An IP address has the following value: 11.64.255.90**

- **1. Write the above IP address in hexadecimal.**
 
	```
		11		64		255		90
		0B		40		FF		5A
					  0040FF5A
	```


- **2. Explain the format of an IP address.** 

	- Format of IPv4 Address:  a 32 bit binary number, normally represented in a dotted decimal notation. Each octet (a set of 8 bits) is separated by a dot (.) and can have a value between 0 (00000000) and 255 (11111111). Normally the first part identifies the network and the second part identifies the host.

	- The maximum possible addresses are approximately 4 billion, but we need more, so the IPv6 addressing scheme was introduced. 

	- Format of IPv6 Address: a 128 bit binary number normally represented in a hexadecimal notation. It has 8 groups of 4 hex digits for a total of 8*4 (32) hex digits. Leading zeros could be omitted, a set of consecutive groups of zeros can be replaced with two colons (::)

	- Unlike the classful IPv4 addressing, the IPv6 addressing scheme uses a hierarchical addressing scheme that allows a much flexible address allocation (for identifying networks and devices)

**b. Study the following sentence:**

- **“When a user enters a URL into their web browser, the DNS service locates the required resource.”**
- **Explain how a URL and DNS are used to locate a resource [4]**

	- When the client types the web address, for example, in this case, google.com.
	- First, the web browser will try to find the ip address of the google.com domain in the local system cache. ( You view this cache in windows using ipconfig /displaydns  and in linux, you can use sudo journalctl -u system-resolved ). If it cannot be found in the local dns cache, the request will be sent to the resolver server (which is basically our ISP most of the time), Now, the resolver server will check its cache to find the ip for google.com. If it cannot be found, the query will be sent to the root server (this is at the top most level of the DNS hierarchy) (13 sets of these root servers are placed around the world ). The root server doesn't know what the IP address is for google.com. The root server will be the IP of the TLD server (the .com tld server in the case of google.com). The TLD will direct the resolver to the final level, the Authoritative Name Server which knows everything about the domain including the IP address. The IP for google.com will now be sent back to the resolver and then the PC, where both the resolver and the PC will cache that IP for a fast DNS resolve speed the next time the computer needs to resolve the IP for google.com. 

# Question 6 

**6. Access to World Wide Web content uses IP addressing.** 

**a. State what IP stands for.** 

- Internet Protocol

**b. The following table shows four possible IP addresses.** **Indicate for each IP address whether it is valid or invalid and give a reason.**

|Address|Type|Validity|Reason|
| - | - | - | - |
`3.2A.6AA.BBBB` | Hexadecimal | Invalid | 3 is valid, 2A is valid. 6AA and BBBB are not as they exceed the maximum value of FF. This is an IPv4 Address (identified by the dots (.) as in dotted decimal notation) |
| `2.0.255.1` | Denary | Valid | This is an IPv4 Address (identified by the dots (.) as in dotted decimal notation). No octet exceeds the maximum value of 255 |
| `6.0.257.6` | Denary | Invalid | This is an IPv4 Address (identified by the dots (.) as in dotted decimal notation). The third octet exceeds the maximum value of 255. (257>255) |
| `A.78.F4.J8` | Hexadecimal | Invalid | This is an IPv4 Address (identified by the dots (.) as in dotted decimal notation). A, 78, F4 are valid hex values but J8 is invalid. Hexadecimal only uses digits 0-9 and letters A-F only.|

**c. Describe two differences between public and private IP addresses.**

- Public IPs are globally unique and are routable on the internet but private IPs are not. Public IPs are assigned by the ISP (Internet Service Provider). Private IPs are used within private networks and cannot be used to access resources on the internet (a NAT steps in the way and helps to do it). Public IPs are visible to the outside world but private IPs are hidden.




































