# Question 1

**a Examples of primary and secondary storage devices include:** **hard disk, DVD-RW, flash memory**. **For each device, describe the type of media used.**

- Hard disks: Magnetic disks called platters that allow data to be read or written using using a read/write head that moves across the disks surface

- DVD-RW: optical disk made of a reflective metal layer, mostly aluminum, data is recorded onto a disk using a laser light and can be erased and written multiple times. Data can be stored either in double or single layers or in double side or single side or a mix of them (allowing 4 combinations) eg: dvd-rw ss dl / ds dl, ss sl, ds sl

- Flash memory: non volatile storage that uses NAND flash (semiconductors). Doesn’t require power to store data like RAM does (which is volatile). Used in UBS, SD cards and SSDs. higher end options have a DRAM cache directly pointing the operating system to the data, decreasing  the duration it takes to read and write data (specially random read and write times) and increasing responsiveness immensely. 

**b Describe the internal operation of the following devices: DVD-RW**

- The disc is inserted into the drive, and lasers detect the presence of a disk.
- A laser beam is focused onto the disc's surface, which is coated with a dye layer that is sensitive to the laser's heat. The laser heats up the dye layer, creating a series of pits and bumps (known as lands and grooves) on the disc's surface, representing 1s and 0s.. Drive's controller controls the laser's intensity and speed, making sure that the data is written to the correct location on the disc. Once written, the laser can read the data back by shining a laser beam on the pits and grooves and measuring the reflected light. When erasing data, drives use a different laser with higher power, which heats up the dye layer to a higher temperature and resets the pits and grooves back to their original state. The disc can be rewritten multiple times, with the laser erasing the old data and writing new data in its place, using the same method mentioned above.

 # Question 2
 
 **a Pressing a key on a computer keyboard can cause a character to be displayed on the computer screen.**

- **i Identify four aspects of the basic internal operation of a keyboard that makes this happen.**

	- Keys are in a matrix (like a chess board) <- physical key
	- When a key is pressed, two wires in the axis touch
	- Microprocessor identifies this intersection(of closed circuit after touch)  <-keyboard controller
	- It send the relevant character code as stored in ROM to the computer <- scan code generation

- **ii Describe an alternative method for a user to enter some text into a computer system.**

Use voice recognition. User speaks into the system. Microphone converts analogue longitudinal voice waves to digital form with ADC. voice recognition software analyzes the sound waves with language models. Speech To Text (STT) happens. Necessary software will work accordingly once synthesized. Perfect for controlling the radio or navigation systems in cars (as hands won’t be used)


**b**

- **i In the operation of a laser printer there are a number of initial stages which lead up to the creation of a full-page electrostatic image. Identify three of these stages and present them in the order that they would occur. [3]**

	- Gives the highest quality print
	- Electric charge is placed on drum by laser and mirror
	- Laser discharges a lower electrical charge on the drum
	- Laser draws the print on the drum itself
	- Drum is coated with toner
	- Toner only comes to areas where the laser has drawn
	- Paper is discharged
	- Toner is placed on the paper as paper goes through
	- Separate toners are required for colors. Colors are made from CMYK

- **ii Identify two of the stages that make use of this electrostatic image**

	- The first stage is the developing stage, where the electrostatic image is transferred onto a photosensitive drum or belt that has been coated with toner. The second stage is the transferring stage, where the toner image on the drum is transferred onto a piece of paper or other media. The paper is passed through the printer and brought into contact with the drum, and a reverse charge is applied to the paper, causing the toner to stick to the paper.

- **iii State the difference in the procedure used for color printing from that used for black and white printing.**

	- The electrostatic image is created on multiple photosensitive drums or belts, one for each color (cyan, magenta, yellow, and black  -  CMYK), using a laser. Each drum or belt is then coated with the appropriate color of toner particles, which are attracted to the charged areas of the drum or belt to create a color image.

# Question 3

**a Describe the operation of a touch screen technology that can be used in association with any type of computer screen**

- A capacitive touch screen works by using an array of sensors to detect changes in the electrical charge of the screen that occur when a finger or stylus touches the screen. The sensors are in a transparent layer. When a user touches the screen, the sensors detect the change in electrical charge and send this information to a controller chip which processes the signal and sends it to the CPU. Capacitive touch screens are used with LCD, LED, or OLED screens. This is the most common now. Earlier, resistive touch screens were used: which is a flexible surface that causes contact between electrically resistive layers beneath when touched

**b Describe the operation of a touch screen technology that is only applicable for use with a flat screen.**

- A resistive touch screen is made up of multiple layers, including a flexible top layer, a rigid bottom layer, and an electrically conductive layer in between. When a user touches the screen with their finger or a stylus, the top layer is pressed down and makes contact with the conductive layer underneath. This gives a bad experience, its old, still used in industrial devices as it can be operated with any object

# Question 4 

- Repeated

# Quesion 5

**a Describe two differences between RAM and ROM. [2]** 

- RAM is volatile - needs constant power supply to retain its stored data. When data is turned off, all data in RAM is lost. 
- ROM is non volatile.
<br>
- RAM can do both read and writes.
- ROM is read only, cannot be changed by computers processor

**b State three differences between Dynamic RAM (DRAM) and Static RAM (SRAM). [3]**

- DRAM (Dynamic RAM)
	- Made from capacitors that leak electricity. 
	- Regular recharge needed (in a matter of milliseconds)
	- Fewer electronic components per bit stored, cheap, slow, high density
	- Rarely, when DRAM is used for cache, it's called ‘embedded DRAM’

- SRAM (Static RAM)
	- Made from flip-flops that store data indefinitely while the computer is on
	- Short access time, fast, expensive, used for Cache (mostly)
	- Sometimes used for microprocessors with limited memory

























