# Question 1

**a One of the reasons for having an operating system is to provide a user interface to a
computer system.**

- **i Identify two different types of interface that an operating system should provide. [2]**

	- Graphical user Interface
	- Command Line Interface

- **Identify for each type of interface a device that could be used to enter data. [2]**
	
	- graphical user interface: computer mouse, touch screen
	- command line interface: keyboard

**b Identify and explain briefly three other management tasks carried out by an operating system. [6]**

1. Resource Management
	- Process
		- a program that has begun execution
		<br>
	- When two or more processors need to access the same file
		- scheduling of processes
		- resolution of conflicts when two processes require the same resource
		
2. Memory Management
	- Protection
		- Make sure that two programs won't use same memory address
	- Organization
		- scheme like virtual memory with paging/segmentation
	- Optimization
		- decide which process should be in main memory

3. Device Management
	- Install appropriate drivers
	- Control of usage by process

# Question 2

**a A PC operating system will make available to a user a number of utility programs.**

- **i Identify two utility programs that might be used to deal with a hard disk problem. [2]**

	- hard disk formatter, hard disk formatter

- **ii For each of these utility programs explain why it might be needed and explain what it does. [5]**

	1. Hard Disk Formatter and Checker
		- Why?
			- Remove existing data from used disk
			- Setup file system
			- Partition disk into logical drives if needed
			- Fix broken sectors
		- Due to physical defects (mishandling, power loss, heavy movement), sectors are damaged: called ‘**bad sectors**’. 
		- Formatter marks bad sectors and doesnt let the 
		filesystem to use those bad sectors
	2. Hard Disk Defragmenter
		-  Why?
			- Optimize
			- make file reads and writes fast
		-  Fragmentation
			- When files are used made, changed and deleted over time,
			-  they become fragmented across the disk sectors. 
			-  Now, the logical arrangement of data in sectors doesn’t allow  files to be stored in a contiguous block. 
			-  it's called Fragmentation (Fragmented Data)
			- Now, when the file is extended, it may use multiple sectors in a non sequential, non contiguous manner.
			- this also increases read times
		-  DeFragmentation
			- Defragmenter arranges these fragmented files into a contiguous block.
			- Now, files can be read faster, and, as all the free space is also next to it contiguously 
			- fast writes

- **iii Identify two other utility programs for a PC user. [2]**

	- backup software
	- file compression utilities
	- virus checker / antivirus

**b Library programs are made available for programmers.**

- **i Explain why a programmer should use library programs. [3]**
	- can reuse caode
	- saves time
	- increases productivity, reliability and code quality (as it is highly tested by the community)
	- follows industry standards

- **ii Identify two examples of a library program. [2]**
	
	- jquery
	- python standard library, numpy, etc...

# Question 3

**Assemblers, compilers and interpreters are examples of translation programs.**

**a State the difference between an assembler and a compiler or interpreter. [1]**

- Assembler Vs Compiler Vs Interpreter

|             | Assembler                                    | Compiler                                     | Interpreter                                  |
|-------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Function    | Translates assembly language code into machine code | Translates high-level source code into machine code | Executes source code directly, line by line   |
| Input       | Assembly language code                        | High-level programming language code           | Source code written in a high-level language  |
| Output      | Machine code (executable binary)               | Machine code (executable binary)               | Immediate execution of source code            |
| Execution   | Not required as it generates machine code      | Requires the compilation process before execution | Executes the code line by line               |
| Portability | Specific to the target architecture            | Dependent on the compiler and target platform  | Dependent on the interpreter and target platform |
| Performance | Generally faster as it directly translates to machine code | Optimized code generation for improved performance | Slightly slower due to interpretation process |
| Examples    | NASM, GAS, MASM                               | GCC, Clang, Visual C++                        | Python, JavaScript, Ruby, Perl               |

**b A programmer can choose to use an interpreter or a compiler.**

- **i State three differences between how an interpreter works and how a compiler works. [3]**

	- Compiler:
		- Once compiled, can run anywhere on same OS + architechture
			- generate machine chode specific to target platform
		- faster performance when running the executable binary
		- translate the entire source code into machine code before execution
			- which can be executed independtly without the need for the original source code
	- Interpreter:
		- Needs source code when running the program
		- have slower performance than using a compiler
		- can run on any platform directly from the available source code as long as the interpreter is installed
		- executes the code line by line

- **ii Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of an interpreter compared to a compiler. [4]**

	- Compiler

| Advantages | Disadvantages |
| - | - |
| No source code shared in distribution | Insecure source code (viruses, RATs) |
| Once compiled, can run anywhere on same OS + arch (~ Cross Platform) | |
| Faster execution than interpreter | |
| Executable can be made to dist | |

	- Interpreter

| Advantages | Disadvantages |
| - | - |
| As program halts if error: it's easier for debugging | Delaying error discovery (like syntax) |
| Can detect and fix early errors | Need to share src code in distribution |
| Good debugging | Need development env. to run code |
| | One error can lead to many errors |

- **iii If a programmer chooses Java, a special approach is used. Identify one feature of this special approach. [1]**

	- The java compiler first turns the code to java bytecode, which can be executed in the JVM in any system that has the JRE installed, allowing a write once, run anywhere approach

# Question 4

**a Explain the meaning of the following terms:**

- Prettyprinting
	- color code keywords, functions, variables, etc…
 - Context-sensitive prompt
	 -  Display hints of what to come next, auto-completion
 - Dynamic syntax check
	 - Alert programmer of syntax errors while running
 - Debugging
	 - Help find and correct errors
	 - Add breakpoints and go through the program

**b Describe the features you would expect a debugger to provide. [4]**

- Prettyprinting,
- Context-sensitive prompts
- Dynamic syntax checks
- Expanding and collapsing code blocks
- Debugging
- Pause program execution and inspect its status with breakpoints

# Question 5

**Before it is used, a hard disk is formatted using disk formatter software.**

**a Explain why formatting is needed. [2]**

- To configure the disc for use / initialise tracks and sectors
- To initialise a file system (e.g. FAT, NTFS) / create a file directory
- To install a boot sector (if creating a bootable disk)
- To check all sectors and mark bad sectors 

**b Eventually, the performance of the hard disk deteriorates.** **Name three other utility programs that might be required. State why each is needed. [6]**

- Defragmenter
	- To rearrange blocks that are used for each file to make blocks contiguous (so that file
reading is faster)
	- To reduce head movements
- (Disk) contents analysis/(disk) repair software/Disc checker
	- To identify bad sectors so that they can be marked as unusable
 	- Verifies file system integrity and fixes logical file system errors
- (Disc) compression/file compression
	- To compress/decompress the contents of the disc, thus increasing capacity
 Backup software
	- To store disk contents (somewhere else) in case of disk failure
- Anti-malware program
	- To scan for/remove/quarantine viruses and/or other malware
 - (Disc) cleaner
	- Finds redundant/unnecessary files, gives the user the option of deleting them if disc
getting full
- Disc space analysis
	- Visually demonstrates the disc usage by showing sizes of files/folders 


# Question 6

**6 A programmer is writing a program that includes code from a program library.**

**a Describe two benefits to the programmer of using one or more library routines. [4]**

- The code is already written
	- (So the programmer is not starting over again) which saves time
- The code will have been used by many people
	- So it should be already thoroughly tested //relatively error-free
- The programmer can use, e.g. mathematical /graphics functions, etc. (may not know how to code (black box) )
	- Can be sure that the function will perform as it should // simplifies the program.
- The code should conform to industry standards
	- And therefore contribute towards a more robust program 

**b The programmer decides to use a Dynamic Link Library (DLL) file.**

**i  Describe two benefits of using DLL files. [4]**

- The executable file is smaller/the executable does not contain all the library
routines …
- … DLL files are only loaded into memory when required.
- Changes /improvements /error correction to the DLL file code are done
independently of the main program...
- … So there is no need to recompile the main program
- … All programs using it will benefit
- single DLL file can be made available to several application programs...
- … Saving space in memory / easing the pressure on memory

**ii State one drawback of using DLL files. [2]**

- The executable code is not self-contained …
- … the DLL file(s) needed to be included at run time.
- Appropriate (linking) software must be available at run-time …
- … to link/include/import the DLL files.
- The DLL file must be present …
- … otherwise (unable to find X.dll) errors
- Unexpected changes to the DLL file / corrupted DLL file …
- … could mean the program stops working as expected
- Malicious changes to the DLL file …
-… could install a virus on the user’s computer/related files could be corrupted 


