# Question 1

**1 A farmer has a large barn to house poultry for the purpose of collecting the eggs that are laid. The environment inside the barn affects the egg-laying performance of the poultry. Traditionally, the farmer had routinely entered the barn to check that all was well with the environment. If there was a concern, the barn had facilities for correcting the problem.** 

**a More recently a computer-based system has been installed. This allows the farmer to observe data on a computer screen. If any of the data is of concern the system has been programmed to show a flashing red sign on the screen.** 

- **i Identify the type of system that the farmer has had installed. [1]**

	- Monitor System

- **ii Identify the type of devices that have been installed inside the barn. [1]**

	- Sensors

- **iii Describe two examples of this type of device that could be used and explain what their purpose is with respect to the functioning of the computer-based system. [6]**

	- Temperature sensors, humidity sensors, light sensors, and any other sensors that are helpful to provide information about conditions affecting egg laying

	- For Temperature Sensors: they are made to measure and monitor the temperature inside the barn. Place them at different locations to ensure accurate temperature readings. This sensor will provide the real time temperature. This can be monitored constantly to determine if it falls within the best range for poultry egg-laying. When the amount of eggs laid are high, the temperature increases, due to high entropy. 

	- For Light Sensors: they are made to measure and monitor the light levels inside the barn. They detect the intensity of light present in the environment, which is essential for the well-being and productivity of poultry. They should be placed carefully to ensure representative measurements throughout the barn. 

**b The farmer has been told that there is no need for someone to be watching a screen all of the time. A different type of computer-based system could be installed.**

- **i Identify the type of this new computer-based system. [1]**

	- Control Systems

- **ii Identify the new type of device that would need to be installed inside the barn. (There would be more than one needed). [1]**

	- Actuators, Analogue to Digital Converters (ADC). Digital to Analogue Converters (DAC)

- **iii Describe how the new computer-based system would interact with these devices. [2]**

	- Sensor -> (Analogue Signal) -> ADC -> (Digital Signal) -> microprocessor -> (control action) -> DAC -> (Analogue Signal) -> Actuator

# Question 2
# Question 3
# Question 4